---
layout: spotlight
categories: spotlights

title: Dr. Cathrine Hoyo
headline: Dr. Cathrine Hoyo, PhD, Associate Professor of Biological Sciences (North Carolina State University). <p> Dr. Hoyo, an epidemiologist, was recruited to NC State in 2014 as a part of their Environmental Health Science cluster, which brings together faculty from all 10 colleges within the university to collaborate on interdisciplinary projects.

featured-image: /spotlights/images/cathrine-hoyo.jpeg
date: 2018-02-10
---

Dr. Hoyo grew up in Zimbabwe and went to college in Sierra Leone, before coming to the US to pursue additional educational. She received a master’s degree from UC Berkeley and her PhD from UNC Chapel Hill in 1998. Her post-doctoral work was done in Malawi as part of a collaboration between the UNC Medical School and the Malawi Ministry of Health. She has been on the faculty at North Carolina Central University (2 years) and Duke University (12 years), before moving to NC State.

Mutation to the DNA sequence of a gene is not the only — or, arguably, even the main — source of genetic variation and disease: the degree to which that gene is expressed is also variable. (Expression can be measured as the number of copies of the mRNA from that gene present at a given time or as the number of copies of the protein product… among other metrics.) Gene expression is controlled by gene regulatory elements, which are other DNA sequences. The most well-studied gene regulatory element is the promoter, which is a region close to the start of a gene that helps recruit RNA polymerase to that site to start transcribing an RNA. Many promoters contain a stretch (“island”) of repeated pairs of C followed by G (“CpG”). The C in a CpG pair can be modified by the addition of a methyl group (a small carbon chain), which typically has the effect of turning down expression of the gene.

In a recent paper, Dr. Hoyo and collaborators at USC Keck School of Medicine and Duke examined the relationship between CpG methylation status of a gene called AXL with childhood asthma. Two previous reports had linked variation in CpG methylation status of AXL to prenatal exposure to tobacco smoke, and the same exposure is linked to risk of childhood asthma. So the authors wanted to know if AXL methylation could be a link between prenatal smoke exposure and asthma, particularly since AXL is thought to block overactive immune responses. They used blood samples taken from newborns in the LA area and the Raleigh/Durham area for the DNA and followed up with these children (now 6-7 years old) to see which ones had been diagnosed with asthma. Average methylation of AXL was higher in newborns who developed asthmatic symptoms by 6 than in those who did not. The CpG region of AXL most strongly associated with asthma is near a region of the gene predicted to increase its expression in lung cells, which suggests that lowering expression of AXL (through CpG methylation) prevents it from suppressing inflammatory responses, leading to higher asthma risk.